Activists and human rights defenders are increasingly documenting their
protests using cameras and mobile phones ? often to powerful effect. The
following are useful tips for you to remember if you are going to a
protest and are concerned about protecting your electronic devices if
you?re detained by police.

Think carefully about what?s on your phone before bringing it to a
protest. Your phone contains a wealth of private data, which can include
your list of contacts, the people you have recently called, your text
messages and email, photos and video, GPS location data, your web
browsing history and passwords, and the contents of your social media
accounts. Through stored passwords or active logins, access to the
device can allow someone to obtain yet even more information on remote
servers. (You can log out of these services).

In many countries, people are required to register their SIM cards when
they purchase a mobile phone. If you take your mobile phone with you to
a protest, it makes it easy for the government to figure out that you
are there. If you need to keep your participation in a protest secret
from governments or law enforcement, cover your face so that it is
harder to identify you from photos. However, do note that masks may get
you into trouble in some locations due to anti-mask laws.

**If it is important to keep your presence at the protest concealed, do
not take your mobile phone with you.**

**If you absolutely must bring a mobile phone with you, try to bring one
that is not registered in your name.**

To protect your rights, you may want to harden your existing phone
against searches. For the full set of advice on how to manage the
security of your mobile phone, go the **Mobile Phone Lesson.**

-   **Passwords:** Always password-protect your phone. While
    password-protecting your phone is a small barrier to access, please
    be aware that it is not an effective barrier to expert
    forensic analysis.
-   **Encryption:**Some phones have encryption options available ? these
    should be applied. If you have an Android phone this can be done
    in Settings -&gt; Personal -&gt; Security -&gt; Encryption. The
    Electronic Frontier Foundation has a guide on how to
    encrypt iPhones.
-   **Download secure apps:** Make sure you and your colleagues have
    downloaded apps that will allow you to communicate and
    operate securely. (These are explained in detail later in
    this lesson)
    -   **For communicating**: Textsecure and RedPhone (for Androids) or
        Signal (for iPhones)
    -   **For filming/photographing:**ObscuraCam and InformaCam
    -   **For emergencies:** [Panic Button](https://panicbutton.io/) (Android only)
-   **Back up your data:** It?s important that you frequently back up
    the data stored on your phone, especially if your device lands into
    the hands of a police officer. You may not get your phone back for a
    while (if at all) and it is possible that its contents may be
    deleted, whether intentionally or not.
-   **Keep an emergency number:** Consider writing one important, but
    non-incriminating phone number on your body with a permanent marker
    in case you lose your phone, or are in police custody but are
    permitted to make a call.
-   **Use a throwaway:** You should also consider bringing a throwaway
    or alternate phone to the protest that does not contain sensitive
    data, which you?ve never used to log in to your communications or
    social media accounts, and which you would not mind losing or
    parting with for a while. If you have a lot of sensitive or personal
    information on your phone, or you need to conceal your presence at
    the protest, this might be the best option for you.

If you are concerned about being arrested at the protest, it?s best
practice to pre-arrange a message to a trusted friend or colleague who
is in a safe place. Write your text message to that person in advance
and queue it up so that you can send it quickly in case of an emergency
to let them know you have been arrested.

If you have an Android phone an easier way of doing this is by using an
app, Panic Button, which turns your mobile phone into a secret alarm for
when you're in trouble. When triggered, it sends alerts every 5 minutes
with your location to your chosen contacts. This is a very useful tool
to have when going to a protest where trouble could occur and we
recommend you download it before you go.

Similarly, you may want to plan a pre-arranged call after the protest
with a friend?if they don?t hear from you, they can assume you?ve been
arrested.

In addition to being made aware that your phone has been seized and you
have been arrested, that trusted friend might be able to change the
passwords to your email and social media accounts in case you are
coerced into giving up your passwords to the authorities.

Please note that deliberately concealing or destroying evidence may be
considered an illegal act in itself in some jurisdictions (including
many social democracies).

Be sure you understand the law and the risks before engaging in this
plan. For instance, if you are protesting in a country with a strong
tradition of the rule of law and where protesting in itself is not a
crime, it may be that conspiring to lock out law enforcement from your
accounts may lead to you breaking the law when previously you would be
able to leave without charge.

On the other hand, if you are concerned for the physical safety of you
and your colleagues at the hands of a unchecked militia, protecting your
contacts? identities and your own data from them may be a greater
priority than complying with an investigation.

Once you are at the protest, keep in mind that law enforcement may be
monitoring communications in the area. You may wish to encrypt your
messages using Textsecure (Androids) or Signal (iPhones), or encrypt
your phone calls using RedPhone (Androids) or, again, Signal (iPhones).
All these apps are compatible. You can read more about them in the
Sending a Message or Making a Call lessons.

Please remember that even if your communications are encrypted,
your metadata is not; this means your mobile phone will still give away
your location and information such as whom you are talking to and for
how long.

When capturing pictures or video it is important to be careful of
privacy and safety of those pictured. For example, if you take photos or
record video of a sensitive event, it might be dangerous to you or to
those who appear in the recordings if your phone fell into the wrong
hands. The Guardian Project has created an app called ObscuraCam to
detect/select faces on photos and blur them. It also deletes the
original photos and if you have set up a server to upload the captured
media, it provides an easy way to upload it.

Metadata such as phone identity and location are also captured on photos
and videos. In some instances, such information is really important to
have to prove the credibility of images and video so that they could be
used as evidence in courts of law. At other times metadata can put you
or others at risk. The Guardian Project has made a plugin tool for
ObscuraCam called InformaCam that allows you to store a version of the
image/video with metadata while also creating a redacted version without
any sensitive data that can safely be shared on social media.

Swipe right for this lesson?s checklist

Go to the Beginner lesson for advice on covering a protest as a
journalist.

### RELATED LESSONS/TOOLS

-   [Mobile Phone Lesson](umbrella://lesson/mobile-phones)
-   [Sending a Message Lesson](umbrella://lesson/sending-a-message)
-   [Making a Call Lesson](umbrella://lesson/making-a-call)

### FURTHER READING

-   EFF ? Attending protests

